for markets to be efficient in any
degree, not even perfectly efficient,
this famous idea of the wisdom of crowds
has to be helping us a lot. Uh the
hypothesis that we're all geniuses is
never going to fly, right? So the wisdom
of crowds and you know it well says even
if on average most people don't know the
answer, um the the stupid answers cancel
um and and the right answers don't
because they're the same. My favorite
example of that, and this I might be
dating myself, is is Regis Filin and Who
Wants to Be a Millionaire, right?
Remember the the show, Multiple Choice
Show?
>> It's frightening that you're describing
that as old, but I guess it is.
>> Yeah,
>> it's been off the air sadly. Regis has
passed away. It's old. Sorry. Sorry. Um,
but you had multiple cheats, like three
cheats.
>> One was phone a friend was almost
useless.
>> [laughter]
>> um your you people a your friend usually
wasn't much smarter than you and b
people at least to my eye I I didn't
watch every episode but seemed to choose
friends who knew the same stuff they
knew [laughter]
right you really want to choose a friend
who's in like a totally different field
>> I think in some countries the friends
also had a tendency to deliberately give
the wrong answer because [laughter] they
just didn't want to see their friend
actually win money
>> the most cynical phrase ever is nothing
succeeds like a friend's failure
>> there we
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, [music] it's a big month for us.
>> It's a big month for us. We've been
doing this for 10 years.
>> I know. I can't believe it. [laughter]
>> Do you remember the first episode?
>> Yeah, of course. With uh Tom Keen.
>> Yeah. And then our second episode, I
think, was about bananas for some
reason.
>> I think it was. You're right. It took us
a long time um to figure out what we
were doing. It took us a long time to
figure out what we were doing. And I
don't think I would have at that point I
would have expected that we'd be doing
it 10 years later. I don't know what I
was expecting. I was just turning on a
microphone in a radio studio and talking
for a while.
>> Oh, we started doing it because we
wanted to have a podcast and talk to
interesting people. I think we were
hashtag blessed [laughter] that no one
was listening for a very, very long
time, which gave us a long runway to
figure things out. So we got lucky. That
said, you know, 10 years, it is in fact
a long time to be doing this and a lot
has changed in that period.
>> A lot has changed in that period.
Sometimes mind-blowing. And it really,
you know, I feel like, and we've talked
about this before, for sure. But that
things that we were covering is capital
N at the time are now capital H history.
And it's like these things that are we
sort of take for granted. Everyone was
there. It's like no children, let us
tell you what it was like in the old
days when you know people were worried
the world was going to come to an end
because you know Greece is sovereign
debt and all this stuff that we just
sort of part of the landscape is people
don't remember it.
>> No, one of those things has to be the
idea of value or fundamental investing,
[laughter] right? Like let us tell you
about the days when price actually
mattered and had a limit to what
investors would pile into.
>> Yeah, that's exactly right. Let's talk
about the days when people used to talk
about PE ratios and this stock. Oh, it's
at a 25p. We better sell it and buy the
stock at a 15p or whatever. Yes, it that
feels quaint. Maybe it'll be back there
one day, but for now, given how um many
things in the market seem to be uh some
of these the gram and kind of stuff
>> feels a little old,
>> a little oldfashioned. Little old
fashioned. Yeah. Okay. So, one of the
big themes that has emerged in the 10
years that we've been doing this podcast
is uh everyone seems to have grown more
stupid. I would say hopefully that's not
related. That's not like a correlation
thing. It might be it could be. All
right. But, you know, we have all this
gamification of investing, people
betting on lines going up or down,
people betting on random meme coins,
things like that. And I I think, you
know, we talk about it a lot on the
podcast, but this is actually a
fundamental shift in the market. If you
think about the market as something
that's supposed to be about capital
allocation, yeah, alignment of
incentives, people are investing in
something because they think it's going
to be profitable in the future at the
right price. And now people are just
sort of piling into stuff because other
people are doing it. And again, line go
up.
>> Deep down, I still believe that the
value of a stock should reflect the net
present value of all.
>> I know you're an EMH guy,
>> but I've uh it's been a little bit hard
with uh some of these things. And you
know the other thing too um that is sort
of changed is that like half of our
episodes these days are kind of AI
related in some way and so I think
there's a lot of interesting stuff going
on particularly at the intersection of
tech and applying tech to both investing
in tech but then the application of tech
to investing and so forth. So yes much
has changed
>> a lot has changed and we have the
perfect guest to talk about how everyone
has grown more stupid [laughter] over
time. We're going to be speaking with
someone we've wanted on the show for a
really, really long time. I am very
excited about this. It's Cliff Asnes,
the co-founder and CIO of AQR. Thank you
so much for coming on Odd Thoughts.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> Uh, what's it like to be a rational
person living [laughter] in an
irrational world? Yeah, you've been
doing it for a long time.
>> Well, a rational person is not always
how I'm described. Uh, but there's
rational investing and then there's
rational conduct in your personal life.
So, let's just distinguish those. Um,
you guys in your intro said like it's a
little it's a little scary for the next
hour because you said like a third of
the things I want to say.
>> Oh shoot. Okay.
>> Um, I wrote a rather, you know, gigantic
piece in the Journal of Portfolio
Management. They were having a 50th
anniversary. None of us were quite old
enough to have been there in the first
issue, but they were looking for the old
guys to write kind of retrospectives.
And the piece I wrote was called the
less efficient market. Yeah.
>> Hypothesis. Um, and now I think you guys
probably know this, but my dissertation
adviser was a a littleknown guy named
Eugene FMA.
>> We've heard of him.
>> Um, I was his TA for two years. I grew
up in EMH. I love that you guys just say
EMH and your audience knows
>> Yeah.
>> what you're talking about. That is not
the norm for me when I when I when I
talk about these things. Um,
>> I was not a perfect efficient marketer
even back then.
>> Neither is Jean, by the way. Um, Jean
Jean's not a zealot. He'll he'll he
about third week of class. I know this
because I took the class three times. I
didn't fail. Uh, but as the TA, I sat
through it three full years. And like
the third week, he always tells the
class markets are almost certainly not
perfectly efficient because Jean's a
brilliant guy and recognizes that
perfection is a really stupid idea.
>> He's been on the show, by the way.
Great. Yeah. Yeah. And I don't know if
that came up, but he's always very
honest about that. He probably thinks
they're considerably more efficient than
I do these days. And I think I probably
think it's they're more efficient than
than maybe the active average retail
>> trader. Um, but I wrote a dissertation
for him on the success of price
momentum. Um, that is not a very Gene
FMA dissertation. A Gene FMA
dissertation is I've studied price
momentum and it loses gobs of money and
these idiots on Wall Street do it
anyway. That's kind of a fishing
markets. Look how silly they are. Um,
and he was great about it. I remember I
I kind of mumbled. I'm like, I want to
write a dissertation on price momentum.
And by the way, I I find it works very
well. What was that, Cliff? It works
very well. And he said, if it's in the
data, write the paper.
>> Um, so I I've drifted at least a little
bit further from efficient markets. Um,
even way back then. Um, now price
momentum, I'll do a lot of segways.
You're going to have to stop. That's
great. I do parentheticals within
parentheticals. Price momentum is often
thought of as this index of
irrationality.
It can work for two different reasons.
It can work because of yes feedback
loops, chasing line goes up just like
you said before and people pour in um
which isn't very connected to reality.
It's just chasing returns. Um but it can
also work uh because of what the
behavioral finance people would call
underreaction.
uh news comes out that should move the
price by so and so um on average we have
found I say we it's the royal we of
academia and private researchers that
the price moves the right direction but
doesn't move all the way
>> so if you trade on that there's still a
little bit to go um that's a quant thing
you wouldn't want to bet on one stock
that way but if on average that happens
and you could do that through observing
the price or the fundamentals there's
usually a little bit more to go so it's
not always irrational u momentum
But here's here's what I observed in the
very beginning of AQR. AQR launched in
1998 after we had a fabulous run at
Goldman Sachs. There's survivorship bias
in this. You don't get to start your own
billion dollar hedge fund unless you
have a fabulous run at Goldman Sachs or
something equivalent. Um,
we had a good first month. You know how
the story is going to go when you say
you had a good first month, right? And
then
>> that first month, by the way, was August
of of 1998 when the S&P was down 20% on
the Russian debt
>> crisis. Um, and we're doing high fives
like we say we're market neutral and
we're up a little bit in a crash. Uh,
and it was my first of many lessons
never to high five in this business.
[laughter]
When you fully retire and divest, you
get one high five. But but
>> that's the Well, no, it's the end when
you do the high five. I'm I'm a I'm I'm
a quant who is is also superstitious
which if that's a contradiction what the
heck but the next 18 months was the
crescendo of the famous dot tech bubble
>> and that was not kind to us.
>> Um it was particularly not kind because
we decided to start with a extremely
aggressive market neutral fund.
>> So momentum helped as you can imagine in
a bubble but value was just destroyed
and that was most of the model back
then. Things have really broadened
>> broadened out. We hit spreads between
cheap and expensive. This is something
we invented at the time and now a lot of
people do. No one had people said short
sort stocks on valuations go long the
cheap short the expensive. But the very
obvious question of how cheap and how
expensive are they sometimes pretty
tightly clustered? Are they sometimes
wider? Does that mean they're better or
worse going forward? Was not asked
before. Mhm.
>> So we invented this measure and the
spread between cheap and expensive for
50 years had looked like a well- behaved
series. It moved around a fair amount
but and then I'm drawing on my hand if
no one can see the [laughter] video.
>> Oh yeah. Oh yeah, we should mention this
is an audio medium. So
>> and then in late 99 2000 went to just
way wider than anything ever seen for 50
plus years. We also showed that
historically those were better times.
You never saw that before, but when it
was wider were better times for value,
we stuck with it. We made money round
trip. Life was good.
If you had asked me after the round
trip, which was harrowing, you you know,
even if we love our process, you never
want to start a business with poor
returns.
>> If you asked me at the end of that,
which is probably a couple years later,
2003,
>> do you think you're ever going to see
that in your career again?
I think I would I think no one asked
thank God because I think I would have
gotten it wrong but I but I think I
would have said oh probably not.
>> Um hopefully I wouldn't say definitely.
No one who does what any of us do for a
living should say definitely. That's a
bad word in markets.
>> 40% is the favored term, right? There's
always a 40% chance.
>> There's always um but a it was the
craziest thing numerically in 50 plus
years. B the question presupposes it's
built in that I and people of my cohort
will still be around. Mhm.
>> Right. And we'll probably be closer to
in charge.
>> Um so how's it going to happen again?
And then it happened again. Um even
before CO by late 2019 that spread
between cheap and expensive was
approaching dot extremes and then it
blew past it in in in CO it went to what
I
>> in a geeky math joke that no one ever
gets called 125th percentile.
>> Um there is no 125th percentile. It's
just the new 100th percentile. I'm
trying to convey that it went further
and we survived that one too. We
suffered uh somewhat and then we made
more than all of it back. Roundtrip
good. Most of the time we really don't
look like value investors. By the way,
only in extreme bubbles do we have seem
to have that property and I think it's
smaller now than it used to be. Uh last
five years have been quite strong for us
and it's not been a very good value
>> market. Yeah, there's so many questions
that I have that I want to ask that um
are sort of embedded or related to your
answer. I'm going to ask actually just
like a very narrow question sort of skip
ahead and something though
>> you make it the spread between the most
expensive and the cheapest stocks.
>> Yes.
>> How much easier it is to simply compile
that spread is it today versus the
technology that you're working with when
you're starting your career
>> for that I got to disappoint you and say
not that much easier.
>> Um we had the databases.
>> Okay. Um, a lot of technological
advancement is about speed.
>> Okay.
>> And new data sets, what what quants will
call alternative data is something we're
very into.
>> But the classic data, if you're looking
for price to sales ratios,
>> um,
>> I'm old, but we had we had telephones in
Bloombergs. Um, but that does bring us
to me observing these two episodes.
>> And I stepped back and I asked a
question, what the hell happened? Why
did we see something crazier than 50
years and then why did it happen again?
And that led to this paper, the less
efficient market hypothesis. I do
believe that markets have shown and I
think I have some good guesses as to why
that they are more susceptible to bouts
of crazy um than they used to be. Just
before going further, one quick
definitional question. efficient markets
because one way you could define whether
an market is efficient is are these
securities disconnected from what you
would say the net present value of the
all future free cash flows another way
that I often think about it but I'm no
quan is are there obvious opportunities
for the active manager to make money
just for our purposes here how do you
define market efficiency
>> much closer to the first one
>> okay
>> um the practical question of can you
make money um from these is if they're
are big deviations from fair value and
this relates to some stuff I did in the
less efficient market hypothesis. If
there are big deviations, the classic
and you'll notice a giant caveat. If you
can stick with your position, not a
small thing,
you will make money. Um there are
opportunities and in fact I think a less
efficient market uh in that sense in in
your present value sense uh almost has
to deliver bigger opportunities for
people who can stick with it. It also
makes it considerably harder to stick
with. Yeah.
>> Because the extremes you have to live
through and the length of time those
extremes can go on for. One thing that I
I'm dying for an academic to take me up
on this. I'm too old to do the math on
this. Uh but most I've never seen a
model that looks at pain disutility, the
negative of losing money in terms of how
long you've lost money for, not just
magnitude,
>> right? it and in real life I can tell
you a draw down that is one and a half
times bigger but was six months instead
of three years is ridiculously easier to
to live through.
>> Um so the the bigger disconnect from
reality again I haven't even told you
why I think it's going on
>> but if I'm right that we have these
bouts of it it's not necessarily every
day things are crazy but these bouts of
it is is a two-edged sword. It's a
bigger opportunity for people who can
stick with it and it's harder to do and
I find that not that what I think is
fair is particularly relevant but I find
that that really fair harder to do but
more lucrative if you can do it. I don't
think the efficient market idea of
buying what is fundamentally mismatched
against its future cash flows adjusted
for its risk forecasting those cash
flows what risk really means. We still
have some open issues there. Yeah. But I
I don't think that will ever go away
unless markets are perfectly efficient.
Um but how easy it is to identify and
how easy it is to stick with. I think
crazy markets um make it easier to
identify what to do and harder to do
that.
>> I do want to ask you why you think this
is happening. But before we do, this is
a very basic question, but sometimes the
basic questions are the most
interesting. But when you say it's
painful to try to stay rational during
these bouts of irrationality,
>> why is that exactly? Because I get that
there are funding costs. I get that
there are carrying costs, but on the
other hand, you're a big hedge fund with
deep pockets. This is presumably what
investors are paying you to do. Is it
just the emotional trauma or stress of
having to explain to everyone why you're
taking the position that you have when
it's not paying off yet?
>> That is a big part of it. Um, I have a
running fight with one of my co-founders
who never gets upset. Um, I'm always
upset, but I'm more upset when we're
losing money.
>> This is sort of our dynamic, I have to I
get more upset than Joe does.
>> Where he'll come in my office during a
bad period and I'll be upset. It'll be a
bad day and a bad period. He's like,
"Why are you upset?" And I'm like,
"Well, because people are yelling at us
and I we're losing money." Uh, and he's
like, "But you're pretty sure we're
going to win, right?" I'm like, "Yeah."
He's like, "And you have all your own
money and your kids' money in this,
right? So, you're not doing anything
different. You wouldn't do that if you
weren't." I'm like, "Yeah." He's like,
"So, we're going to win. It's just a
question of when. Why do you care?"
>> And I look at him like he's from Mars
and go, "Why do you not care?" And we
finally figured out, it's kind of
obvious that I talk to clients a lot
more than he does. [laughter]
Um, it's a lot easier to have that
attitude when you're just sitting in
your office. Also, we are not immune
from this. you get, even if people love
you and think you've done well for 25
years, you have a bad two years, you get
redemptions and sometimes they're of
serious size.
>> Um, we we fell by like half over about
three years.
>> Um, and that's not fun. You have to
shrink your firm. You have to let some
people you love go. Um, so there is some
real pain that goes with it. It does not
that period did not shake my confidence
in the actual investment process. Um, I
feel bad. I think I did better than our
investors because I kept adding and
saying take the ball up on what I do.
Um, not everyone can do that and I know
more than they know. Not in a weird
insider sense and just a I should be
more confident in my own process than
anyone else is. Um, but it was it is
excruciating the the amount I remember
um someone I admire tremendously when
Stan Ducken Miller uh retired to run his
own money. He's still very active in
markets I think. He wrote a note that
resonated with me uh and because I
forget the exact details, but the
essence was it's too painful and too
upsetting to run client money. The man
never had a down year. And I'm like, if
Stan can't take it, those of us and
we've had a lot more up years than down
years and life's been good or I won't be
sitting here. But we've had never three
but two plus years of of pain. And I'm
like, if Stan can't take it, man, um
this is harder to do than it it looks
like. The whole world thinks you're
stupid when you're losing money. Um, no
matter what you can point to, no matter
what evidence you can point to, I
shouldn't say the whole world. Your mom
still likes you. Um, but a lot of your
world and no, a lot of investors stuck
with us and I love him for it, but you
do lose a lot of people. So, it's not
fun for a business to go through that.
>> Intuitively though, is to your point
measuring the disutility of long draw
downs versus deep draw downs. This must
be a very acute thing for anyone who's
not just managing their own personal
portfolio for the reason that you've
just described.
>> Yeah. I I've I've talked about this with
other money managers, this idea of
length versus versus severity. Yeah. Um
and I've never had one who's not like
Yeah. length is is much worse. Well, one
of the things is when something goes on,
>> it's often a similar story for two and a
quarter years.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. So you go back after six months
where rationality is getting absolutely
punished. You get a lot of sympathy from
people. You show them, look, uh, bigger
bargains. We're right. We're going to be
right. You go back six months later,
they're like, okay. You go back six
months and six months later, they're
like, you're just saying the same
freaking
>> event and eventually they must just
think, maybe you're a dinosaur. Like
maybe you just don't get this new wave
that's going on. Is it possible that
we've really had
>> regime? Again, it's not everyone. We
have tremendous amount of investors
stick with us. We have ones who double
up who get it. That those are often
>> opportunities, but but you shrink when
you lose money for a while and you grow
when you make money for a while. It's
the ironclad rule of this business and
and sometimes it's just backwards.
>> So, one of the things that has been
happening recently that has changed from
2015 when we started doing this is
retail participation in the market. And
it just feels like it is such a big
thing for retail investors now to use
things like options, even, you know, one
or zero day options, the kind of stuff
that you might more traditionally
associate with someone running a hedge
fund. Uh, and now they're trading.
>> No, we're not stupid enough to trade
zero [laughter] day options.
>> All right. Some hedge funds then. Does
the increased presence of retail in the
market change the way that you do
business at all? Um, I think it
contributes to what we're talking about
of this dislocation. Um, I hate this
because I sound very elitist when I diss
on on retail, but there's a lot of
academic work that shows retail on net
losses. They don't net is important.
They go through periods where they win.
Um, they go through periods where they
win a lot. You know, if you buy a meme
stock and it triples tomorrow, you don't
always lose. But on average, retail
transfers money to Wall Street and to
institutions. Um, so if they're a bigger
force in markets, you're going to have
more of that going on. Um, and it jives
perfectly because that would raise the
opportunity. if they're generally on the
wrong side of things, but there are more
of them,
many more of them than they used to be,
they can be right,
even if they're wrong on the facts, they
can be right on the numbers for longer
than they used to be.
>> So, I I do think this is part of it, and
I apologize to all the really smart
retail investors. Anytime you talk about
averages, you're dissing a whole lot of
people who don't deserve
>> to be, but on average, retail losses.
zero day options.
My god, they're making exactly the
people they claim to despise on Wall
Street. Very rich uh by trading these
things. Um and it's it's it's just fan
duels. Uh I love that. Uh before all
right, we got to get to the question of
why, right? But one last question sort
of leading up to it.
>> How do you establish that? What do you
look at in the market that right now you
say this is a less efficient market than
once it was? What are these number? What
is the measure or is it just feel or you
just it feels sort of crazy like all of
us observe.
>> Most of it is quantitative. Um I do
start with this thing I've talked about
already the spreads between cheap and
expensive. I don't just look at spreads.
Um I wrote a piece back in 2000 during
the tech bubble. It's called bubble
logic. never got published because I
tried to make a book out of it
>> and the bubble came down too fast for
me. Um it it that was good for my
business but bad for my my my author uh
uh career. Um where I didn't just look
at
>> price multiples. I looked at it in a
more holistic sense. What growth do we
need to justify these multiples trying
to come up the only time I will use the
the the word bubble is when I've tried
very hard and it doesn't mean we'll come
up with the same answer but this is the
framework I use. I've tried very hard to
come up with assumptions even if I don't
like them and think they're at the outer
edge of possible that could justify
these prices. Yeah.
>> And if they don't come close
>> twice in my career I've been willing to
go no this this I'm willing to use the
B- word. Um, I should tell you right now
when it comes to within stocks, the
whole market is a different issue. The
market is quite expensive right now. But
when it comes to this spread between
cheap and expensive, I'm not using the
bubble word.
>> Okay,
>> we're that same measure. It's not the
125th percentile anymore. It's the um I
haven't called the 77th percentile.
>> It's wider than on average. Maybe making
it a little more attractive if you can
stick with it. that big if. Um, but on I
I don't use the word bubble for 77th
percentile. I use it for blowing
through. So, five years ago, I was
saying it's a bubble. Now, I'm just
saying this is a little bit of an odd
market.
>> So, I want to ask you more about the
bubble, but we keep uh we keep touting
that we're going to ask you the why
question. So, let's ask the why
question. Okay. Why are markets becoming
less efficient?
>> Okay. Well, first of all, and I say this
in the piece, a lot of conjecture going
on. This is an op-ed. Um,
as statisticians, we
>> is like a 50page piece, a 50 page
[laughter]
50 academic oped.
>> Look, this is our first time doing this.
You will be convinced I could do a
50page single [laughter] spaced oped.
>> I believe you. I know you can.
>> Um, it's just as a quant, as a
statistician, you'd like to see a
hundred bubbles have stats on each one.
this way. They're all they'd rhyme, but
they wouldn't be exactly the same. You
tease out what's going on. If you see
two in a 35 year career, you're not
going to be able to prove this
statistically, but I believe in my
conjectures. I'm I'm not soft soaping
them. I'm I'm or soft selling them. I'm
I I I just want it clear that that that
nobody is going to walk away saying he
proved it. Um I list a few reasons in
the piece why markets might be prone to
bouts of bigger disconnects from
reality. My second favorite um is one
I'm sure you've talked about. I know
I've listened to you guys talk about it.
Uh the rise of passive investing. I am
not a passive hater. Um there are really
smart people. Mike Green's out there.
The mount that guy hates passive. Uh I
don't know. The Middle East has never
seen hate like like the Mount Mike Green
hates passive. Um but but again, he's a
smart he's a smart guy. He makes
interesting arguments. I'm not that guy.
I think passive has been a huge positive
for investor welfare. I actually was
lucky enough to be fairly good friends
with Jack Bogle and he was a hero of
mine. He he we had a podcast briefly and
he came and he came on it.
>> Um, in fact, I'll tell you part of that
story in a second.
>> Um, so the rise of I'm not a passive
hater, but here's what we know.
>> We know the whole world cannot be
passive.
>> And when I say passive, I mean in a Jack
Bogle market cap weighted sense.
Sometimes people use passive for people
like us and they really mean
rules-based. like you're not and that's
not how I use the word passive.
>> You mean someone who owns the entire
market.
>> Yeah, we're long, short, and lever. How
you get to passive on that, I don't
know, but some people do. I own the
entire market. Um, we had Jack on the
podcast and he absolutely agreed you
can't everyone can't be passive. Now, of
course, being Jack Bogle, he thinks at
that point the marginal investor should
still move to passive, but he recognizes
the obvious fact that if a 100% of the
people are not looking at prices,
nobody's looking at prices. Who's
figuring out if Nvidia is worth more or
less than the corner drugstore, right?
So, the market gets very weird there. We
don't even understand what happens
there. It's a singularity. I use a
physics analogy. We don't know what
happens there. PhD students in finance
and I used to be one of these will stay
up late at night in their cups talking
about what happens if everyone was
passive. What would it even look like?
We know it's very weird and I doubt all
the weirdness happens between 99.999%
passive and 100. So we're on a curve.
We're a lot more passive than we used to
be. Even that you're probably aware it's
hard to measure exactly how p how much
is passive. direct passive true market
cap weight you can measure. But what
about people who take, you know, 80
basis points of tracking error? They're
kind of mostly passive. You guys
remember
>> people pegged to like custom indices
now? It's kind of funny.
>> You guys remember the Princess Bride?
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Remember mostly dead?
>> That's right.
>> Not fully dead. You're mostly passive.
Um
>> so I think fewer people thinking about
prices. Uh fewer people willing to take
the other side when things get a little
crazy. if one if one side really starts
to get crazy, there are fewer people out
there, that has to exacerbate these
swings.
>> My actual number one reason though, you
talked about the gamification. Um, for
me, it's the overall
I I'm going to sound like a very old man
yelling at the sky on my lawn right now.
You know, get off my lawn or yelling at
the sky, some Simpsons thing.
>> Yeah,
>> I'm Abe in in this case. Uh, but
>> old man yells at cloud.
>> Exact. Thank you. Social media and the
broader environment. I don't want to do
politics
except to say I don't think you find
many people, there'll be some, but I
don't think you find many people who
don't agree with the idea that this
environment has made our politics worse
and more dangerous. We confirmation
bias. We we live in our own bubbles. the
we have algorithms that push us further
and further towards you start out as a
moderate belief, but it keeps pushing
you towards extremes and and pretty soon
you're saying stupid things like, "Hey,
that Tucker Carlson, he's a good guy."
Um, all right. I might have revealed a
little politics.
>> Yeah, you did a bit of politics there.
>> So, all of that adds up to making our
politics worse. More prone in particular
to swings and extremes. Markets are not
arbitrage mechanisms. That's sometimes
misunderstood. They are voting
mechanisms.
>> The price is a weighted average vote
where the weight is by dollars. I lucky
enough to get more vote than the average
person and Warren Buffett gets a lot
more votes than than I get if we all
disagree on on on on opinions. Um the
reason it's not an arbitrage mechanism
and here I'll get a little geeky.
Imagine you're reasonably sure this
thing is mispriced in that Graham and
Dodd sense
and you think it's massively mispriced.
Trading enough to make it a third less
mispriced
>> Mhm.
>> is not very risky to you because it's
not that big a trade and it's very high
expected return because it's that
mispriced. Now you've moved it back to a
third or maybe half. The next part of
the trade is much riskier to you because
you already have the trade on. So,
you're just adding more.
>> Oh, I see. Yeah.
>> And it has half the gain because you've
already closed it by half. So, arbitrage
will not take things if on net more
people believe something stupid.
Stupid's going to win.
>> Um and and we're going to be at least
somewhat off of of real prices. And I
find it remarkably easy to believe that
this same environment that makes our
politics go a little crazy. Um for
markets to be efficient in any degree,
not even perfectly efficient, this
famous idea of the wisdom of crowds has
to be helping us a lot. Uh the
hypothesis that we're all geniuses is
never going to fly. Right? So, the
wisdom of crowds and you know it well
says even if on average most people
don't know the answer um the the stupid
answers cancel um and and the right
answers don't because they're the same.
My favorite example of that and this
might be dating myself is is Regis
Philin and Who Wants to be a
Millionaire? Right. Remember
[clears throat] the the show multiple
choice show.
>> It's frightening that you're describing
that as old but I guess it is.
>> Yeah,
>> it's been off the air sadly. Regis has
passed away. It's old. Sorry. Sorry. Um,
but you had to answer multiple choice
questions and if you miss one, you're
out. They start off ridiculously easy
and they get harder and harder. You had
multiple cheats, like three cheats.
>> One was phone a friend was almost
useless.
>> Um, [laughter] your you people
>> a your friend usually wasn't much
smarter than you and B people at least
to my eye, I didn't watch every episode,
but seemed to choose friends who knew
the same stuff they knew. Right? you
really want to choose a friend who's in
like a totally different field.
>> I think in some countries the friends
also had a tendency to deliberately give
the wrong answer because they just
[laughter] didn't want to see their
friend actually win money.
>> The most cynical phrase ever is nothing
succeeds like a friend's failure.
>> There we go.
>> Um I don't believe I'm not condoning
that, but it is out there. The other one
was um eliminate two of the wrong
answers. That's great. Yeah,
>> obviously even if you have no idea, you
go from one out of four to one out of
two. The other one was poll the
audience. And at least to my
non-exhaustive examination, I didn't I
it seemed to work pretty much every
time. Even if the question was hard
>> because imagine you have
100 people in a room, 10 of them know
the answer.
>> The the other ones are guessing. The 90
distribute evenly over the the four.
Maybe not perfectly evenly. It's but
roughly evenly. the 10 all land on B. So
you pick B because it's bigger.
>> Worked pretty much every time. There's a
crucial assumption in that.
>> The the audience has to be relatively
independent of each other. And they did
that. They weren't talking. It was
silent voting. If the audience all gets
to talk, maybe the 10 convince the 90.
>> But maybe they don't. Maybe a demagogue
with a better uh Twitter feed convinces
everyone. And if you ruin the
independence and I think have we ever
come up with a better vehicle for
turning a wisdom of crowds into a
craziness of mobs than social media. Um
I'd be hardressed to to describe it.
>> I find this to be very compelling that
uh James Surwiki at the New York Times
he came out with that book wisdom of
crowds in 2005 but that was right before
social media blew up. And then you know
there's that famous book in uh 1841
extraordinary popular delusion and the
madness of crowds. So we've always sort
of understood that crowds can be mo be
both mad and wise. And I find this very
interesting the idea that perhaps the
linkedness of the crowd is what sort of
flips it from wisdom to madness.
>> I I think that's exactly it. uh you
maybe can come up with counter examples,
but I think most of the time if the
crowd is making independent decisions,
and this can go for political voting, it
can go for markets, you're going to get
some degree of wisdom. When the crowd is
all making a unified decision, it can
still work out, but you are much more
susceptible uh to um what the quant
technical term is cray cray.
[laughter]
>> I want to pivot a little bit and talk
about AI. Um, you've uh written or
you've talked recently I I forget
exactly the word that was used in some
of the headlines succumbing to the
surrendering surrendering to the
machines and so forth.
>> What is it? We tal we tried to talk a
lot about AI. I don't I still don't know
exactly what it means in any context.
What does it mean to surrender to the
machines in the AQR context?
>> Well, first um not not every journalist
has Bloomberg's high standards. That's
right.
>> I am reasonably certain I said partially
in that and the word partially got
>> okay
>> dropped. Um even skipping all the
details.
>> Yeah,
>> if you're going to use AI in your
process at all,
>> almost by definition you are going to
lose a little intuition. And the way I
say that and it bothered me for a couple
years. I think I slowed us down on AI by
a year or two just by saying, you know,
we've always prided ourselves on the
balance of we intuitively understand why
we think we this makes money and the
evidence that it makes money. And when
you go to AI, you're normally giving up
some, not all. We actually do try very
hard to figure out why we think this
works or doesn't work. But if you
weren't giving up some intuition, what
the heck is the AI doing? If it's simple
and you could have just seen it with the
naked eye,
it's hard to imagine it's it's helping.
Um, but let me give you a concrete
example.
We like good momentum.
>> We like it in price. We like it in
fundamentals.
>> One way people uh on the quant side have
tried to measure this for years is
something like earnings calls. Um trying
to decide if earnings calls are good
news or bad news. And if people
underreact to good news, you want to buy
when it's when it's good news.
>> Is this just like how many times people
say great quarter guys or are you
looking at something else?
>> It's gonna sound about as silly as that.
Okay. You build up tables of words and
phrases with numerical values
>> and then you say, "What's the numerical
score of this?"
>> And they can be much more subtle than
this. I'm going to use a real simple
example. The word increasing plus one.
>> Right?
>> And I'm sure you see the flaw. If the
actual sentence was massive embezzlement
is increasing, [laughter]
you know, our our bad on that one.
>> The amount of fraud we're seeing in our
private credit deals is increasing.
>> Quant survive looking stupid a lot if
that's 47% of the time. If 53% of the
time it's getting it right, fine. And
those things had some efficacy, but they
weren't great.
What we do today is we train
[clears throat]
ML. It's called natural language
processing. It's a sub field of NL of ML
to analyze corporate statements. But
what it does, and this is going to be
the geekiest thing I'll say, it
represents every corporate statement. It
looks across them and represents them as
a set of numbers. What the geeks will
call a vector of numbers.
Then what we do is empirics to say, all
right, we have 50 years of this across
many firms.
We have different vectors or numbers for
every earnings call. What combination go
long when the first number's good, short
when the second number is is is high,
blah blah blah. What best combination
forecasts
that seems to be correlated to what we
were doing before these word count
things just considerably better. It does
a better job than word counts. Lang
[clears throat] language is very
nonlinear. Whether something is good,
whether that word increasing is good. AI
is not perfect, but its chance of
figuring out if if increasing was good
or bad, especially when it's trained on
tons of these, is better than us.
>> Here's where you lose the intuition,
though. I skip the step. I like to do
that. It's sneaky.
>> If you ask myself or even some of the
younger people who are much more toolled
up on on on machine learning than I am
these days, what does that vector of
numbers actually mean?
you often get a
we we really can't tell you that we can
say it's it's summing up in a
mathematical sense the information
content of that we still get intuition
>> because this indicator acts like a
short-term momentum indicator. So it's
picking up what we want it to pick up
and it's also done fabulously well for
us for multiple years in in in real
life.
>> But we are giving up intuition at one
stage that we used to not do. So my
answer was meant to be much more subtle
that there are give ups in intuition
when you move to something like machine
learning. They almost have to be or else
again what are you doing? I was
uncomfortable for that for a while. So I
was starting to miaulpa saying that that
I slowed us down and it came out as well
I used to hate this but now I have no
job. The machine runs it. Um which is
probably going to be true in eight years
but not yet. Uh this reminds me actually
of something I wanted to ask because
another big multi-year decade trend is
the rise of the multistrats
>> and at AQR as I understand it you have a
multistrat model in there but it's more
centralized than some other places. Can
you go into a little bit more detail?
>> Sure. Um they get used interchangeably
but I think this is the difference
between multistrat and multimmanager.
>> Okay. Multistraat just means uh I wrote
a dissertation on choosing US stocks. Um
we have applied [clears throat] similar
things to stocks around the world to
currencies to commodities um uh to
directional bets through trend
following. Um we think of these they are
correlated but low. So we think of these
as different strategies and we think a
set of our strategies uh is better than
a single one or or you know it's just
the power of diversification. Um so
we're big believers in particularly if
you have a common philosophy so it's not
just fitting the data it's it's fitting
into an overall theme of what you
believe in. We're big believers in
multistrats.
What we share with multimmanager is that
belief in diversification. Um,
multimmanager
is what it sounds like. It is. We are
one team building these. Um, we might of
course have little separate teams at
AQR, but we're one firm building these.
They are farming it out two different
people. I to be frank if you had told me
their business model 10 20 years ago, I
would have been very cynical that it
worked. if you told me um a what the
total fees are going to be when you add
up everything that's passed through
through
and a fair amount of them and they vary
in how quick they do this. If
something's not working for what I would
consider a very short while,
>> yeah,
>> they stop doing it. Um and I know there
are a lot of low to medium sharp ratio
riskadjusted return strategies that are
really good long term but have bad
periods. So I if someone told me that
model, I would go, you're going to
charge a ton and you're going to throw
out people who have a bad two quarters.
No. And there have been people who've
obviously proven me wrong. And I'm
humble about this. I don't fully
understand why. They must be very very
good at actual selecting the alpha.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. Uh and this is something that I
we don't do. We're qu we're internal
quants who build our own models. We've
never Maybe it' be interesting one day.
We've never tried to apply that to
choosing outside people, but the plenty
of people, by the way, have tried to
start multi- manager and failed. Um, so
it's not like you just apply this,
charge a ton, uh, hire a bunch of active
managers and fire them if they have a
bad two hours. Just automatically works.
>> It does seem though that like talent is
the the thing that's like capping
multistrat expansion, right? that's the
limiting factor
>> and and and they vary but uh uh some of
the major ones are giving back money. Um
there's a even if you believe in this
model and I I even from afar I have to
be a believer. I've seen the results are
too good for too long in my view to to
have a decent chance of of of
randomness. I don't exactly know what
they're doing. I'm still waiting for for
for Ken and Stevie and Izzy to send me
their exact process. That that would be
wonderful.
>> Izzy doesn't share it with you.
>> No, even better if Medallion would send
me their exact process. Um um but I I
respect it, but the amount of individual
alpha from teams [clears throat] that
can be out there
has to all alpha's finite, but has to
have a a a decently tight cap. And the
ones I've seen are fairly disciplined
about this. And again, it varies. I
can't speak for for for for everyone. I
know we compete for talent with them
much more than we used to.
>> Um we often want uh they have nonquant
parts of what they do, but they have
quant parts of what they do. And for
young quants, um they're often
considering an offer from AQR and
Citadel. Um to pick a just one example,
we win our fair share, we lose our fair
share. I think we probably pay a little
less in the short term, but we don't
fire you if you have a bad week. Um, so
some people are [laughter] seem like a
stress and I'm not picking on Ken. He's
not doing that. I'm just saying.
>> No, but we know that it's a more
cutthroat environment.
>> We've done a lot of episodes on that
environment. We know like they cut bait
pretty quickly if you uh uh lose money.
I want to go back a little bit to the
connection between sort of AI, machine
learning, and interpretability of the
factor.
>> Um, you know, the quintessential, you
know, the risk is of course that you
find something that works strictly from
data mining, right? tickers that start
with B tend to rise on Tuesdays and
>> I usually use use the CEO's middle
initial.
>> Yeah. Stuff like that. We know like but
you know even when you were talking
about um in the very first answer you're
talking about momentum and you said well
there's two reasons that theories for
why momentum can work. Do you think we
let's just go back to the canonical like
quant factors. Is there complete
consensus about why these factors
[laughter] work?
>> Not at all.
>> Okay. Um they you start out with the
great
>> like intuitively like cheap stocks go
but I my impression is that there's even
still disagreement about why
>> yeah um you start out with the great
divide and when um when they split the
Nobel Prize between Gene FMA and Robert
Schiller um my co-founder and I wrote a
piece on the cover of institutional
investor with that title the great
divide because they [clears throat]
there Lars Hansen also won a share of it
I shouldn't leave him out but Schiller
and FMA were juxtaposes the efficient
market guy and the inefficient market
guy, which is fairly close to I I don't
think either of them are zealots, but
it's fairly close to to true. So, you
start out if something has worked
historically and made a lot of money
over over a long period.
>> You start out with what you led with. Is
it data mining? Let's say you convince
yourself it's not.
>> Okay,
>> let's just put that away. And that's
really important. And I'm not, you know,
poo pooing that step. You got you got to
do that. Then you got to ask yourself
why. The two main
contenders are a rational gene FMA kind
of market where some stocks are riskier
than others and whatever you're using to
say go long these and short these is
loading on that risk and if something is
risky
you should make more for investing in
it. One of the problems is identifying a
there are subfights within these fights.
What do we mean by risk? Is risk beta
like the capital asset pricing model?
>> This is where finance academics are like
every other academic because define your
terms mutic at this point. But but is is
risk beta like the capital asset pricing
model? Well, the capital asset pricing
model is a beautiful elegant model that
has failed everywhere it's ever been
attempted. Is risk more
multi-dimensional? Is risk something
like uh what happens in a great
depression which is very hard to to to
measure? Um the other argument is
markets are not perfect, people make
errors and it's behavioral finance. Um
so if a cheap stock beats an expensive
stock because it's inherently adding
some risk that you can't diversify away,
that's a Gene FMA explanation. If it
beats an expensive stock because people
went too far, they didn't invest. They
went past the Graham and Dodd point.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh and if you can hold it, you you make
money when reality sets in. That's more
the Bob Schiller point. I love Jean.
He's my hero. Um I have probably drifted
from 7525 Gan to 7525 Bob over my
career. Um world's complicated. Both one
of the hard parts is everyone wants to
win but
>> both explanations can be true and they
can be true at different times. Uh life
isn't so so simple. But those are the
two biggies. But once you get into
behavioral finance now you can fight
about why what what behavioral bias?
Notice the two you could sum up the two
reasons I gave you for momentum as as
underreaction and overreaction.
Overreaction is chasing, right?
Underreaction is the information came
out, didn't move far enough, and I
hopped on that bandwagon. You know
you're in a little bit of a dodgy area
when your two best explanations sound a
little like antonyms. Um, now the the
the I I'm being intentionally
>> so funny. We know it works. We're just
not sure whether it's underreact
literally opposite things or intuitively
opposite things. We know it's one of
them and there's some debate.
>> I'm being a little too negative
[clears throat] that you can actually
there good papers teasing out. Um the
underreaction is easier to show. You can
actually show the fundamentals do catch
up. Um I think the overreaction probably
kicks in more in bubbles where there is
just more feedback trading. Again, both
explanations can be true and they can
vary in their intensity over time. the
overreaction might have a very small
part of it except plus or minus two
years around a major bubble when it may
be the the the driving force. Um so we
have to get really comfortable. We don't
have to have the be all end all single
explanation. But if there are a few good
explanations and no real counter ones
and we have really strong 50-year
empirical results, yeah, we we're we're
okay. We're taking some bet on this. You
never want to put all your money on one
thing. That's not a quant thing.
>> I'm going to try to connect a bunch of
the sort of decadel long mega trends
that we've been discussing, but um I'm
thinking behavioral finance,
gamification of markets, big data, AI,
all those fun things combining into
sports betting, okay,
>> which seems to be getting bigger and
bigger than ever. And the reason I ask
is because uh I was talking to someone
in a bar the other day and they said
that AQR was doing more sports betting
stuff. Someone in a bar was talking
about AQR doing sports.
>> Yeah, I know. It Well, it probably says
more about the bars that I'm in and the
people I'm talking to than anything
else, but yeah, they mentioned that
>> I'm picturing the Star Wars cantina
right now, I [laughter] got to tell you.
>> So, I I'm just curious, is that a thing
or are you maybe interested in the sort
of prediction market aspect of things
nowadays? Susahana is getting into it.
>> I think I think no one again tells you
exactly what they're they're doing. I I
I my sense is they are into it and are
good at it.
>> This is incipient for us. Um we are
considering and looking at it. Um we
have a long history. Uh Toby Moscowitz
who's a Yale professor and an AQR
partner. Uh great deal by the way. You
get paid for two full-time jobs that are
80% overlap.
>> I'll keep that in mind for the future.
>> If Toby's listening just um you know
you're lucky man. uh he wrote a book
called scorecasting
>> that was all about
sports but the sports analytics the the
money ball type stuff looks a lot like
what we do it looks a lot like people
are not pricing this right people I
wrote my most downloaded paper ever
which is really a little annoying
because it's like the only one I've
written outside of my field
>> was on when to pull the goalender in a
hockey game. Oh yeah, I remember this.
>> Um, and I I wrote it with a with a
colleague and friend Aaron Brown. We
built a model and we came up with you
should be pulling the goalie if you're
losing by one with five or six minutes
left, not with two minutes left. And I'm
pretty sure we're right. We spent a lot
of time in that paper saying why aren't
they doing it and making analogies to
investing
>> um what you know when people know the
right thing to do but can't do it
because the public approprium if they
get it wrong will be much worse,
>> right? Like aren't there saying like
football teams should go for it on
fourth down a lot more than they do.
That's like one of these things that
have
>> and they have started to there is a
feedback where some of these things are
slow some of them are fast. Uh baseball
has largely absorbed a lot of these
things. You know on base percentage was
one of the major insights of of
Moneyball and nobody nobody's missing
that one anymore. Um but we still think
particularly in the betting markets are
not probably not as rational as as Toby
scorecasting book. Um, so we do think
there might be opportunities there, but
I don't want to overstate it. Um, just
because I am cynical about online sports
betting betting, I got to tell you two
things. I I was always a very
libertarian guy. I still think I am. But
a couple things have made me less
libertarian.
Children,
the existence of my children will make
you go, "Yeah, maybe people shouldn't be
able to do anything they want when they
turn 21."
>> Some rules. Um and uh and uh sports
betting and and and maybe walking down
the New York City streets and getting a
contact high. Um the sports betting
we're already, you know, some of these
scandals we're starting to see.
>> Yeah.
>> How do you not have them when you know
some of these people make a ton of
money, but they don't all make a ton of
money. Um and there's a lot of money in
sports betting. Um anything you do for
entertainment is fine if you do it at
entertainment size. If you go to Las
Vegas and you go, the odds are on the
house's side. I'm going to lose $500
over two days probably. If I win, great.
But it's going to be fun.
>> It's factored into the cost of a Vegas
vacation.
>> Uh but like I have a a whole bunch of of
20some year old mostly guys uh in my
extended family. A lot of them are
sports betterers and they're not even It
even pisses me off that they're not even
rooting for their teams anymore. They're
kind of rooting for this player to score
on their prop.
>> It is a strange dynamic. Yeah.
>> Um, so do I think that gamification is
highly related?
>> I I think if you go look at the Robin
Hood app and FanDuel, I I think you will
find they are and far more similar on
their feedback and how they treat uh
things and in how their investors do on
average. But particularly sports
betting, you know, investors lose on
average because the sports betting
companies make money. It's like saying
on average insurance is a bad deal. You
know how I know? Because insurance
companies are profitable. [laughter]
Um, doesn't mean it's stupid to do
because if it's in a risk you can't
tolerate, that could be a fair trade.
>> But there's a price you pay for peace of
mind, which is something I've come to
appreciate over the course of 10 years.
>> There is zero chance that the average
online sports better is making money.
>> Yeah. I just have uh one last question.
You know, I think if you looked at like
um some particularly crazy times in
markets, here's something that's changed
very much since we started the podcast
first 10 years ago. I think if you look
at some crazy times in markets whether
it's you know 2019 when some of these
measures were getting extreme or just
you know the spa mania of 2021
>> one theory that one might have offered
is zer and he's like oh this now we have
you know we haven't been at zer for a
long time and yet some of this sort of
speculative mania craz has not gone
away. How surprised are you that the
move from 0% to say 5% or whatever
didn't have more of a sapping effect on
some of the behavior and speculative
froth or just sort of animal spirits in
these markets?
>> I I am mildly surprised.
>> Okay.
>> Um I left this out, but I actually had
three possible reasons in my paper and
the third one was super low interest
rates for a long time for why things can
get crazy. Now the counterargument is
once you break people's brains they
don't necessarily repair themselves
right uh instantly um so I think it was
probably a contributo factor again very
hard to prove
>> an example of I'll give you a lot of
people in 19 and 20 when the spreads
between cheap and expensive were here
were saying it was the super low
interest rate environment and growth
stocks have more cash flows in the
future low interest rates means they're
worth more we did the math on that it
explained like 2% of the interest value
spread and in 99 2000 interest rates
were quite high.
>> That's right. There was no zero in 99.
>> So it it's not a unified field theory
explanation. Yeah. Do I think it helped
kickstart some? And again, we're in the
soft guesswork,
>> but I I think these are educated guesses
>> and I listed it as one of my three. I
think it certainly kicked us off on some
of these things. Certainly loosen the
bounds of rationality. Absolutely. Free
money will will do that. I don't think
it's not human nature that it all that
that they take away ZERP and everything
comes back. Would I have thought it was
a bigger effect in in in going back to
you know at one point we hit about 5% on
the 10-year almost 5%. Would I have
thought that would have mattered more?
>> Yeah. Um only in 2022 did we see one
ugly year o over that but it has
mattered less than I thought. It doesn't
mean it will never matter. All right,
Cliff Asnice, thank you so much for
coming on OddLots and kicking off our 10
year anniversary celebration again.
Yeah,
>> Joe, that was so much fun.
>> That was great.
>> Literally the perfect guest.
>> Um, one, well, there's so many things
that stuck out from that conversation,
but one of the things that stuck out
from the conversation is this idea about
the the thing that flips the wisdom of
crowds into the madness of crowds,
right? and the idea that maybe the
wisdom of crowds theory works as long as
everyone is sort of isolated and
independent and making their own choice
off of the information available to
them. But it starts to fall apart when
everyone is tied to everyone else and
sort of in the same social network. And
you know, if you think about one of the
dominant themes in markets in recent
years, it has been people hurting into
the same positions, right?
>> I found that to be really fascinating. I
think that's a it makes a lot of
intuitive sense. It probably can explain
a lot of things about the world of
politics, about the world of markets,
etc. This idea that we're all just sort
of one connected
global village, as Marshall McLuhan put
it,
>> we're all just gossiping with each other
>> all the time, just constant talk, talk
talk. No, that's a very interesting
idea. I also thought it was interesting
um the idea of uh length of draw down
versus depth of draw down and the the
former being more painful which strikes
me as something I hadn't I hadn't really
heard anyone talk about that before but
especially from the perspective of a
manager of other people's money that's a
very highly intuitive that makes a lot
of sense to me that okay like yeah you
had a bad quarter whatever eventually
like oh your ideas are just out of date
it's been three years since you made
money maybe time to rethink some of your
fundamental assumptions and how powerful
they're one thing I've learned over the
course of 10 years. The other thing was
the idea of markets not necessarily
being an arbitrage mechanism, which I
think is very counterintuitive to the
way a lot of people will think about
markets. And this idea that like well
sometimes you can't compress the price
all the way to where it should be
rationally or logically or according to
EMH or whatever because the reward just
isn't necessarily there to get to that
like final 10%. It's interesting too to
think about um the sort of link between
patterns and interpretability, why
something works. And in our conversation
uh a couple weeks ago with Ian Dunning
of Hudson River Trading, he's like they
do not put a lot of emphasis on
interpretability. There's a pattern and
they have some reason to establish that
the pattern works and makes money. The
idea that they then have to also come up
with an economic story about why it
works is not so important to them. Maybe
that's because it has to do with time
frames. Obviously, Cliff's uh trading
time frame is going to be very different
than a high frequency trading firm like
um HRT. But it is interest and then it's
interesting to think that even in the
most established quant patterns like why
do cheap stocks outperform more
expensive stocks over the long term?
Right? Even there there's dispute about
why this pattern holds even though it
feels a little bit more intuitive. So
much interesting stuff here. It's also,
I guess, it sort of warms my old cynical
heart um that maybe maybe the edge for
humans will be um spotting the regime
change, right? Which,
>> you know, at least there's something
left for us to do if it's not just pure
pattern recognition. Um shall we leave
it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> All right. This has been another episode
of the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Wisenthal. You can follow me
at the stalwart. Follow our guest Cliff
Aznes. He's at Clifford as follow our
producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Arman Dashel Bennett at Dashbot and
Kaleb Brooks at Kalebrooks.
>> And for more OddLots content, you can
check out our daily newsletter that is
at bloomberg.com/odlotss.
>> And you can join fellow listeners in
conversation in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please like, leave a comment, or
better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.